# Blanc de Chine

The extremely fine, evenly toned porcelains in this section were made in the kilns of Dehua in Fujian province, southern China. Fujian, a tea- growing region, attracted the attention of European merchants in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and many of these objects were brought back to Europe, where this type of white Dehua porcelain became known as blanc de Chine (French for 'white of China'). They were also exported to Japan in large quantities.  

Dehua specialised in whitewares, the most highly prized were those with an ivory- coloured glaze. References in seventeenth century literary sources note that the translucent appearance of Dehua whitewares was the result of 'truly fine' porcelain stone that was dug by driving a shaft into the side of a nearby hill, from where the material was then pulled out with a rope. The earliest pieces of Dehua porcelain were made of this locally mined porcelain stone, with little or no clay, and were thinly potted. Unlike Jingdezhen, the Dehua kilns had no access to water transportation and until the arrival of foreign merchants most of its products were sold locally.  

The most common types of Dehua products were incense burners and Buddhist figures moulded and finished by hand. In China, these were usually placed on household altars and the latter were worshipped as devotional images. They were also brought to Europe as exotic curiosity items during the seventeenth century, where they were placed on tables and cabinets in the residences of aristocrats and wealthy people, or exhibited in porcelain rooms.  

By the eighteenth century, Europeans were familiar with Chinese polychrome ceramics. Dehua wares simply may have been seen as too plain by comparison, and many were gilded or enamelled in Europe to make them more attractive to customers. The Dehua kilns also produced objects tailored for the European market, including figures of Dutch men and women and Christian figures. These wares were closely copied at European porcelain factories, such as Meissen, Chantilly and Bow.  