# Porcelain manufactories in Europe  

Portuguese traders were successful in returning home with samples of kaolin, which they discovered in China to be essential in the production of porcelain wares, but Europeans remained ignorant of the techniques and processes involved in the production of porcelain until 1708, when the first European hard- paste porcelain (made from a compound of the feldspathic rock petuntse and kaolin clay fired at around  $1400^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ ) was made in Meissen, Germany by Johann Friedrich Böttger. With support from the porcelain- obsessed Augustus II the Strong of Saxony (who on his death in 1733 owned 35,798 pieces of porcelain; the largest collection in Europe), Böttger established a factory at Meissen, just outside Dresden, in 1710, and was soon producing large amounts of hard- paste porcelain. In the 1720s, the Meissen factory developed a new and extensive range of enamel colours, and the factory's painters excelled in fantastic depictions of life in an imagined Far East. These successes were soon followed by the founding of a second factory in Vienna by Claudius du Paquier, assisted by the former kiln master from Meissen, which began making hard- paste porcelain by about 1719. A number of other factories opened in Germany in the 1740s and '50s, often with workers from Meissen or Vienna who provided the necessary technical expertise.  

The discoveries in Meissen were followed by the establishment of major factories elsewhere in Europe. In Italy, where soft- paste porcelain (an imitation, low- fired porcelain that lacked the ingredients found in hard- paste porcelain) had been made at the Medici workshops since the late sixteenth century, Francesco Vezzi established a porcelain factory in Venice that began producing hard- paste porcelain in significant numbers in 1720. Experiments by the Marchese Carlo Ginori led to the development of a hard- paste porcelain factory in Doccia, near Florence in 1737, which produced works inspired by delicate white wares from Dehua (fig. 7). Both men were assisted by workers from the Du Paquier factory, and Doccia porcelain from the 1740s sometimes features painted decoration that reflects the influence of Du Paquier porcelain—demonstrating the atmosphere of technological and stylistic exchange that characterised the European ceramic industry of the eighteenth century.  

Kaolin was not discovered in France until the second half of the eighteenth century, and all French porcelain produced before 1770 was soft- rather than hard- paste. Both types were first made in factories which had previously produced the most common ceramic product of the time—faience, a type of tin- glazed earthenware—like those in Rouen and Saint- Cloud. Perhaps the most successful of these was at Sèvres in the western part of Paris, which had moved from its former premises in Vincennes in 1756. With the financial backing of King Louis XV (r. 1715–1774), the Sèvres factory soon came to dominate not only the French ceramic industry, but also the entirety of European ceramics for the second half of the eighteenth century. Innovative and experimental new forms were always in development, and the factory looked to different sources of inspiration, such as Japanese lacquer (fig. 8). By the mid- 1750s, it had overtaken the Meissen factory in terms of production and innovation. It remained at the forefront of European porcelain production for the rest of the century.  

Across the channel, English manufacturers struggled to discover the secrets of making porcelain without access to the necessary ingredients, and between the 1740s and 1760s were only able to develop formulae that created a range of supports porcelain materials for tableware. This has argued after the discovery of kaolin clay in Cornwall in 1746 by an English chemist named William Cookworthy, who soon found even better- quality clay in St Stephen's, near St Austell. After two decades of experimentation, Cookworthy patented his recipe for making porcelain and established the Plymouth China factory in 1768—the first in England to manufacture hard- paste porcelain. By the turn of the century, England had a flourishing porcelain industry, with factories in Derby, Worcester, Staffordshire, Liverpool and elsewhere. Primarily commercial ventures that operated without noble or royal financial support, they were run by entrepreneurs and artisans, and much of their output was aimed at a growing middle class.  

The European factories were so successful that eventually the demand for Chinese porcelain began to diminish, and towards the end of the eighteenth century the trade fell into serious decline. But centuries of genuine artistic exchange stimulated by the trade in porcelain had left an indelible mark on the arts of Europe. Chinese ceramics remain a potent source of design ideas for artists today, working in fields as diverse as architecture, interior design, theatre and painting.  

Ben Chiesa Assistant Curator, University Museum and Art Gallery, The University of Hong Kong

4. Some scholars have suggested that English manufacturers may have produced hard-paste porcelain before Böttger, but his factory in Meisen was certainly the first to produce it in large quantities (Queiroz and Agathopoulos 2005).    