# Chinese porcelain in Europe and Asia  

The word porcelain originated with the Venetian traveller Marco Polo (1254- 1324) when he saw white- bodied ceramics being made in China for the court of Kublai Khan. He called them porcelain, Italian for a white seashell, and this soon became the standard term in Europe. But China had been producing porcelain of the highest quality for markets across the globe long before the arrival of Europeans. From the sixth to twentieth centuries, Chinese kilns produced everything from magnificent display pieces for the imperial court to vast quantities of bowls, plates and dishes inter- de- for everyday use and for export to Southeast Asia, Japan, Korea and the Islamic world. The appeal of these works lay not just in their technical achievement, but also in their association with Chinese art and culture, long viewed as a source of learning, tradition and vast wealth.  

The first Chinese porcelains arrived in Europe in the fourteenth century, when small numbers were presented as rare gifts to the ruling houses of Europe via intermediaries in the Middle East (fig. 1). Delicate, nearly transparent and resistant to extreme heat and moisture, they were technologically superior to the thick, low- fired European ceramics made before the eighteenth century, and were regarded as objects of great rarity and luxury. Their construction was so poorly understood that European collectors often had them mounted in gilt silver or gold in a manner similar to naturalia (natural wonders) like ostrich eggs and large shells, which emphasised their preciousness and transformed them into entirely different objects. They were often displayed in cabinets of curiosities: collections of extraordinary objects which, like today's museums, attempted to categorise and tell stories about the wonders of the natural world (fig. 2).  

By the early sixteenth century—after Portugal established trade routes to the Far East and began commercial trade with Asia via Portuguese- controlled ports in Macau, Malacca and Dejima—porcelain became an important component of the wider trade in silk, spices, tea, ivory, metalwork and lacquer between East and West. Major production centres like Jingdezhen in Jiangxi province responded to demand in Europe by producing large amounts of porcelain specifically for export, transported and used as a form of ballast in large merchant ships. New arrivals like the Dutch and British built up competing trade networks in the seventeenth century, which stimulated the production of special shapes and patterns for certain countries, as well as commissions from wealthy families who wanted personalised features on their dishes. The fashion for collecting these objects spread so quickly as to appear almost contagious, and was described by some enthusiasts as la maladie die porcelainine—'porcelain- sickness'. Among the wealthiest collectors this led to the creation of 'porcelain rooms', where masses of porcelain wares were displayed together and arranged on mantelpieces, cabinets and fitted wall- mounts—part of the late Baroque interior which combined the lavish use of colour with wood panelled or lacquered walls.  

1. Architect and designer Daniel Marot (1661-1752) is often linked to this late Baroque style. His designs for several rooms of Kensington Palace demonstrate the typical high-density approach to porcelain display of the late Baroque period (ca. 1660-1725).  

The appearance of these objects changed in step with tastes in Europe. At times consumers favoured designs that depicted an exotic East, while at others Western patterns with prominent armorial crests or landscapes and figures taken from prints were preferred. European designs were transmitted via a well- established trading network which carried models to China, where they were copied onto special services (fig. 3). This often had strange results, such as a Dutch charger with the use of A- arts technical school's AMSTEL DAM's copper exhibition cover with the seal of Portugal painted upside down (fig. 4). Europeans also affected artistic change by bringing new technologies and techniques to China, such as the famille- rose (rose family in French) palette, which was employed widely on both domestic and export porcelain. Guiseppe Castiglione (1688- 1766), a Jesuit painter patronised by the Kangxi, Yongzheng and Qianlong emperors, famously introduced Western painting techniques such as single- point perspective to Chinese artists, which found expression across a variety of mediums.  

Like all successful inventions, Chinese ceramics inspired competition, at first in Asia and later in Europe. In the late Tang period, traders from the Middle East brought Chinese porcelains to western Asia, where potters in Iraq copied them with great ingenuity. Lacking access to naturally occurring kaolin clay—a mineral rich in silicates that gives porcelain much of its strength—they emulated the beauty of pure white porcelain using white slip (a liquefied suspension of clay particles in water), often embellished with painted decoration in blue pigments derived from cobalt oxide (fig. 5). Following the introduction of Chinese examples towards the end of the Tran dynasty (1225- 1400), Vietnamese potters developed their own unique ceramics, which were more heavily potted than Chinese wares and slightly off- white in colour (fig. 6). Produced at major kiln sites like Chu Dou and Bát Tràng near Hanoi, these wares benefited from the first of several interruptions to porcelain production in China, brought about by social unrest and dynastic change, and by the fifteenth century formed part of a lively intra- Asian trade in ceramics with Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines.  

2. Referred to as the 'Ming gap' (ca. 1370- 1570) by scholars like Roxanna Brown, these interruptions occurred between 1325 and 1380. The second severe shortage of blue-and-white porcelain saw China's market share of ceramic production decrease to  $50\%$  from 1368 to 1424-1430. This decreased to  $5\%$  from 1424-1430 to 1487, before rebounding during the reign of the Hongzhi emperor, and then declining once again until the formal rescinding of the haijin (sea ban) in 1567.  

On China's borders, nearly five centuries of Goryeo dynasty (918- 1392) rule in Korea saw blue- green celadons inspired by wares from China become the dominant type of ceramics produced on the peninsula. And Korean potters, many of whom arrived during two invasions of Korea led by Toyotomi Hideyoshi in the 1590s, took an active role in the development of porcelain production in Japan. The early porcelain wares they produced, called Imari after a port near kilns in Arita, had a coarse, grainy texture with fluid, free- form designs in various shades of blue. They were influenced by both Korean and Chinese monochrome porcelain and less formal blue- and white wares from southern Chinese kilns—the latter export wares that were made to conform to the aesthetic of the Japanese tea ceremony. Later, Imari wares were consciously designed to cater to Western tastes and became much more colourful and regimented, at times achieving more access in Europe than their Chinese counterparts.

3. The Dutch, exempt from restrictions on trade placed on other European nations by the Japanese authorities, also spread the Arita potters to Chinese underglaze blue porcelain, which was popular in Europe, so that they could use it as an example in their own work.  