# Blue-and-white  

Perhaps the first truly global commodity, blue- and- white porcelain reached a wider audience than any other type of Chinese ceramic. Sent to markets in Southeast Asia, Japan, Korea, India, the Middle East and even Africa, it inspired potters in major ceramic centres to produce elegant ceramics of their own design; from the rich turquoise fritwares of fifteenth- century Iznik, to elaborately panelled Japanese kraak wares from seventeenth century Arita. Blue- and- white porcelain was also the first to be collected in Europe in large numbers, sparking a craze for things Chinese in the sixteenth century that would last well into the nineteenth, as new generations of artists and collectors rediscovered and renewe the art form.  

The earliest surviving Chinese blue- and- white ceramics were made in the Tang period, when kilns in northern China dominated the production of both high- fired white stonewares and porcelains. A shared creation of China and the Islamic Middle East, they were decorated with cobalt blue imported from northeast Persia or the Arabian Peninsula, using decorative techniques invented by potters in Basra, Iraq to embellish tin- glazed earthenwares. These earthenwares were themselves developed in imitation of Chinese white wares, demonstrating the remarkable hybridity of early ceramic industries in Asia.  

Tang blue- and- white ceramics represented a brief period of experimentation that was not repeated until the fourteenth century, when strong familial, cultural and economic ties to the Islamic world and the stabilisation of overland trade routes under the Mongol- led Yuan dynasty opened new markets and made access to imported cobalt easier. Yuan imperial patronage turned the kilns of Jingdezhen in Jiangxi province into the largest porcelain production centre in China.  

Combined with a cultural policy that promoted artistic exchange between different ethnic groups, this patronage created an atmosphere of experimentation that allowed new forms and styles to develop, including highly finished works intended for the court and less formal wares for the export market, transported along the silk road and from major ports like Canton and Quanzhou.

The success of Yuan blue- and- whites laid the foundations for the dominance of the export industry in the Ming and Qing dynasties, when millions of ceramics were produced in the imperial kilns and private commercial enterprises. Tailored with specific designs for certain markets, they often found their way elsewhere. The Portuguese purchased blue- and- white porcelain made for the Malay Peninsula in Malacca, and when the Dutch established a foothold in the Indonesian Archipelago in the first decades of the seventeenth century, they gained access to the important transhipment hub of Batavia (Jakarta), from which over twelve million Chinese ceramics were shipped to Holland between 1607 and 1684. Not all of these were designed with European consumers in mind and Dutch still- life oil paintings reveal that porcelains in shapes seemingly made for non- European customers were sold and used in Europe.  

Blue- and- white porcelain remained the most popular export form until the end of the seventeenth century, when growing European interest in wares decorated with coats of arms encouraged the use of polychrome enamels that allowed for more detailed, accurate depictions of heraldry. The Jingdezhen kilns, still the most important in China, responded to this demand and the trade in colourful porcelain supplanted blue- and- white to become the defining aspect of Chinese export porcelain in the eighteenth century.  